The investigation into Brad Pitt's alleged child abuse has been expanded to focus on all of the actor's kids with Angelina Jolie, a source connected to Jolie told The Huffington Post.

Initially, the Los Angeles Department of Children and Family Services had focused their investigation on a specific incident involving the former couple's 15-year-old son, Maddox. It was reported that Pitt became "verbally abusive" and "physical" in front of his children while the whole family was on their private plane. 

The investigation was meant to close by the end of October, according to In Touch, but a source told the magazine it "was not closed on schedule for a reason." The outlet claims the extended investigation is a result of new accusations against Pitt, including multiple alleged instances of verbal abuse. 

"The DCFS investigation is now going to continue for at least several more weeks," the source added. 

According to TMZ, the DCFS will investigate other alleged incidents, including some between Pitt and Jolie which were reportedly witnessed by some of their children. A source told the outlet some of the estranged couple's kids have been fearful around "The Big Short" actor. The Huffington Post has reached out to a representative for Pitt regarding these new accusations and will update this post accordingly, while the DCFS was unable to provide further information regarding the investigation.

News of the alleged child abuse was first reported by TMZ, shortly after Jolie filed for divorce from Pitt in September. According to a source who spoke to People, as of last week, the DCFS investigation was "absolutely ongoing." 

Jolie and the children were also reportedly interviewed by the FBI about Pitt's behavior. Apparently, the agents were trying to determine whether or not there was enough evidence to support the child abuse claims to warrant an investigation. 

"The agents wanted a breakdown of everything that happened from when the plane took off to when it landed," a source told Us Weekly. "They're looking into charges of assault."

The source told the outlet that the FBI "will likely investigate for another few weeks" and once they finish "they will present the case to the prosecutor, who will evaluate whether they feel the need to bring charges against Brad." 

In a statement sent to The Huffington Post, a representative for the FBI said, "the FBI is continuing to gather facts and will evaluate whether an investigation at the federal level will be pursued."
