Of the 1,450 or so human pathogens, only a few have the ability to rapidly cause disease 
and kill. While most are exotic and rarely encountered by Americans, such as Ebola virus 
and plague bacteria, one on this list is commonly found in the US and more importantly, 
on up to one-third of its residents. It’s known as Staphylococcus aureus - commonly 
referred to as Staph.

Normally, Staph is a common member of our microbial population. Our bodies can safely 
co-exist with this bacterium as it poses no immediate threat. However, if the bacterium 
can find its way into tissues and the bloodstream, troubles are likely to occur. These 
include diseases such as acne, mastitis, impetigo, and the life-threatening conditions 
known as toxic shock syndrome and sepsis. Making the situation worse is the potential for 
antibiotic resistance, which can hinder treatment and increase the chances for unwanted 
outcomes.

For years, researchers have been learning about how Staph causes infection. The bacterium 
has a variety of mechanisms to injure the human body. Most of these chemicals arise quickly
 and have a drastic impact on the way our ability to function.

The bacterium also appears to have an ability to evade the immune system.
This hinders the body’s ability to prevent the bacterium from spreading and worsening the 
conditions of disease. Most of these appear to involve blocking the ability of immune 
cells from attacking the bacterium and killing it. Yet, one of these mechanisms involves
 protection against our most potent line of defense: antibodies.

How exactly the bacterium manages to accomplish this task hasn’t been entirely figured out.
 But the answer now may be at hand thanks to an American team of researchers. They have 
 identified how the bacteria keep those antibodies at bay and prevent this branch of the 
 immune system from being effective. The answer lies in the ability of the pathogen to 
 stall the effects of the antibody-producing B-cell.
The team worked with both Staph and another member of the genus, Staphylococcus epidermidis,
 which also may be called Epi. This species made for a great control as it is a member of
  our natural human microbial flora, and usually harmless. This allowed the researchers 
  to identify any differences between the two in relation to the immune response.

The process was relatively straightforward. The team acquired blood samples from individuals
 for use in laboratory tests. In the lab, either Staph or Epi was used to ‘infect’ the blood.
  The effects of the two on immune function were then examined. The hope was that Staph 
  would somehow act differently than Epi and shed light on the mechanism of evasion.

When the results came back, the researchers had found an incredibly significant difference
 between the two species. Epi bacteria seemed to be controlled quite easily as it was 
 tightly bound to B-cells. In contrast, Staph seemed to be free floating in the blood 
 without any worry of being nabbed. In essence, Epi was quickly apprehended and jailed 
 while Staph continued to be on the lam.

For the researchers, this revelation suggested Staph was producing something allowing it
 to remain free. To find it, a series of mutation experiments were performed to find the 
 one gene responsible for this action. Using a combination of UV light and also genetic
  mutation, they eventually found the culprit. But the source wasn’t a single gene or 
  protein. Instead, it was an entire system.

The culprit system was a group of genes known as S. aureus exoprotein expression 
(abbreviated to SaeR/S). This was not a surprise as this collection produced proteins
 necessary for proper immune evasion. But for this study, the researchers wanted to 
 venture even deeper into the system to uncover which of the molecules arising from this system were involved.

