China's taken another leap forward, with the launch of its largest ever rocket, 
the Long March 5 ("Chang Zheng 5" in Chinese) on November 3.
Built by the Chinese Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology, the heavy space launch LM-5 
has a thrust of 1060 tons and a massive payload capacity of 25 tons, putting it in the 
same class as global heavyweights like the American Atlas V, Delta IV Heavy and European
 Ariane V. The LM-5 carried the experimental Shijian 17 electronic propulsion satellite 
 into geostationary orbit (GEO).
Originally, there would have been six LM-5 variants, but they have been superseded by the 
Long March 6, which first flew in September 2015, and Long March 7 in June 2016. Together,
 the Long March 5, 6 and 7 will be the workhorses of the modernized Chinese space launch 
 program.
The LM-5's research and development phase began in 2007, followed by fabrication of the 
rocket fuselage, with integrated testing of components like fuel lines, propellant tanks,
 jetpumps and electronic controls, beginning November 2015. With a fuselage skin only 3 mm 
 thick, the LM-5's safety features include doubly redundant critical systems, such as 
 electronic controls. LM-5's rocket motors burn liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen (LOX/LH),
  with only water as a byproduct, making it very environmentally friendly compared to 
  previous Long March rockets, which used dinitrogen tetroxide and the carcinogenic 
  unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine.
The LM-5 has a payload faring diameter of 5.2 meters, enabling it to carry much wider 
cargos than smaller previous Chinese rockets. This is critical for payloads like permanent
 space station modules and large diameter spy satellites. Both LM-5 variants have a 5 
 meter diameter for the first stage and uses four booster rockets. Each booster rocket has
  a thrust of over 140 tons from its twin YF-77 engines.
The LM-5 that flew on November 3 was the Long March 5E variant, which is geared towards 
geostationary orbit (GTO) launches. In its first stage, it uses two 72-ton thrust YF-77 
liquid hydrogen and oxygen engines in its core stage, assisted by its four boosters. 
Operating in the vacuum of deep space, the Yuanzheng 2 (YZ-2)"space tug" and second stage,
 powered by two 10-ton thrust YF-75D engines, places the payload into GEO. Objects in GEO 
 are high enough to stay over the same geographical location, making them critical for 
 activities which require continuous line of sight to specific areas, like communications 
 and navigation.
In contrast, the Long March 5B deletes the second stage, but retains the same four booster 
set up. The weight savings from removing the second stage LM-5B enable it to carry 25 tons 
to low earth orbit (LEO), including massive payloads like space stations. In contrast, 
the previous Chinese rocket, the Long March 2, could only carry 10 ton payloads into LEO.
The LM-5 has a long mission manifest in the years to come. Next year, it's rumored to be
 launching a next generation Chinese military communications satellite to GEO, and then 
 the Chang'e 5 lunar soil return mission and the Martian rover in 2018-19. More heavy 
 lifting will follow, for the 20-ton modules of the Chinese permanent space station. 
 Potential future missions after that include launching large spy satellites, and even a 
 possible manned lunar mission involving multiple LM-5s.
